APM Latency Investigations (#29648)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/guide/latency_investigator.md

---
title: APM Investigator
private: true
further_reading:
- link: "/tracing/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Datadog APM"
---

> {{< callout url="https://www.datadoghq.com/support/" header="Request access to the Preview!" >}}

Author: TODO: Update this link.

APM Investigator is in Preview. To request access, fill out this form.
{{< /callout >}}

## Overview

The APM Investigator diagnoses and resolves application latency issues through a guided, step-by-step workflow. It consolidates analysis tools in a single interface to accelerate root cause identification.

{{< img src="tracing/guide/apm_investigator/apm_investigator.png" alt="APM Investigator UI" style="width:90%;">}}

## Key capabilities

The APM Investigator helps you:

- **Investigate slow request clusters**: Select problematic requests directly from the latency scatter plot.

> - **Identify the source of latency**: Determine whether latency originates from your service, a downstream dependency, databases, or third-party APIs.

Reviewer: The switch in this list from singular to plurals gave me pause for a second, but if it's intentional, ignore me!

> - **Narrow the scope**: Isolate issues to specific data centers, clusters, or user segments with [Tag Analysis][1].

Author: Note this link is broken but will be fixed when https://github.com/DataDog/documentation/pull/29657 is merged.

- **Find root causes**: Detect faulty deployments, database slowness, third-party service failures, infrastructure problems, and service-level issues.

## Starting an investigation

> Launch investigations from APM service pages or resource pages.
> 
> To begin:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Launch an investigation from an APM service page or a resource page.
```

1. Navigate to a service showing latency issues.

> 2. Find the latency graph showing the anomaly.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Find the **Latency** graph showing the anomaly.
```

> 3. Hover over the graph and click **Investigate**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Hover over the graph and click **Investigate**. This opens the investigation side panel.

```

{{< img src="tracing/guide/apm_investigator/apm_investigator_entrypoint.png" alt="APM Investigator entrypoint" style="width:90%;">}}

> 
> This opens the investigation side panel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Investigation workflow

### Define context: Select slow and normal spans

To trigger the latency analysis, select two zones on the point plot:

- **Slow**: Problematic, slow spans
- **Normal**: Baseline, healthy spans

<div class="alert alert-info">Latency anomalies detected by Watchdog are pre-selected.</div>

{{< img src="tracing/guide/apm_investigator/latency_selection.png" alt="Selection of slow spans on the point plot" style="width:90%;">}}

This comparison between the slow and normal spans drives all subsequent analysis.

### Step 1: Identify the latency bottleneck

The investigator identifies whether latency originates from your service or its downstream dependencies (services, databases, third-party APIs).

**Analysis approach**:
The investigator compares trace data from both your selected slow and normal periods. To find the service responsible for the latency increase, it compares:

> - **Execution Time** (self-time; the time spent on the service that is not spent in downstream dependencies) spent within each service across the two datasets. The service with the largest absolute latency increase is the primary focus.

Reviewer: This parenthetical is a little confusing. I'm not sure what `self-time` means, or why the parentheses end when they do? Also, on a very picky note, I would add a colon and a capital here for internal consistency 🤓

Author: Good catch--thanks!

> - **Call Patterns Between Services**: It analyzes changes in the number of requests between services. For example, if service Y significantly increases its calls to downstream service X, the investigator might identify Y as the bottleneck.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Call Patterns Between Services**: Analyzes changes in the number of requests between services. For example, if service Y significantly increases its calls to downstream service X, the investigator might identify Y as the bottleneck.
```

Based on this comprehensive analysis, the investigator recommends a service as the likely latency bottleneck. Expand the latency bottleneck section to see details about the comparison between slow and normal traces. A table surfaces the changes in self-time and in the number of inbound requests by service.

The following example shows two side-by-side flame graphs that compare slow traces against healthy traces in more detail. Use the arrows to cycle through example traces and click **View** to open the trace in a full pageview.

{{< img src="tracing/guide/apm_investigator/latency_bottleneck.png" alt="Latency bottleneck section" style="width:100%;">}}

> From the table, click the `+` icon that appears when you hover over a row to add that service to the context of investigation for further analysis of recent changes on the service.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To investigate recent changes to a service, click the `+` icon that appears when you hover over a row to add it as context for your investigation.
```
I'm not 100% sure this is accurate - just an idea to make the sentence a little easier to follow 🙂

The investigator then helps you determine if recent deployments on the service or the latency bottleneck service caused the latency increase.

The **Recent changes** section surfaces:
- Deployments that occurred near the latency spike timeline on a [change tracking][2] widget
- A latency graph broken down by version

{{< img src="tracing/guide/apm_investigator/recent_changes.png" alt="Recent changes" style="width:80%;">}}

**Analysis approach**:
The APM Investigator analyzes this data in the background to flag if this section is relevant to examine (if a deployment occurred around the time of the latency increase you are investigating).

### Step 3: Find common patterns with Tag Analysis

The investigator also uses [Tag Analysis][1] to help you discover shared attributes that distinguish slow traces from healthy traces. Tag Analysis highlights dimensions with significant distribution differences between slow and normal datasets.

{{< img src="tracing/guide/apm_investigator/tag_analysis.png" alt="Common patterns in slow traces" style="width:80%;">}}

The section surfaces:
- Tag distributions comparing the slow and normal datasets across all span dimensions.

> - Highlights of the most discriminating dimensions that might help understand the latency issue, such as `org_id`, `kubernetes_cluster`, or `datacenter.name`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Highlights of the most discriminating dimensions that might help you understand the latency issue, such as `org_id`, `kubernetes_cluster`, or `datacenter.name`.
```
